---
id: 14
title: Maximize responsible data transparency
---

Consider the ways in which the public might be interested in seeing data so that the work of criminal justice, public safety, and homeland security agencies is as transparent as possible. When we collaborate in the open and publish relevant data publicly and with respect to security and privacy guidelines and best practices, we can work towards mission success together. By building services more openly and publishing open data, we simplify the public’s access to government services and information, allow the public to contribute easily, and enable reuse by entrepreneurs, nonprofits, other agencies, and the public. 

### Checklist
1. Explore the presentation of raw data (incident reports, for example), crime and other statistics, and spatial representations through bulk downloads, open standards, and common interoperability profiles.
2. Consider participation in open data forums and data sets such as are provided with data.gov and various state and local versions of open data portals.
3. All presentations of data to the public must preserve privacy and security policies for the protection of individual civil liberties and the control of access to detailed data.
4. Ensure that data from the service is explicitly in the public domain, and that rights are waived globally via an international public domain dedication, such as the Creative Commons Zero waiver.
5. Catalog data in the agency’s enterprise data inventory and add any public datasets to the agency’s public data listing.
6. Ensure that we maintain the rights to all data developed by third parties in a manner that is releasable and reusable at no cost to the public.
7. Ensure that we maintain contractual rights to all custom software developed by third parties in a manner that is publishable and reusable at no cost.
8. When appropriate, create an API for third parties and internal users to interact with the service directly.
9. Offer users a mechanism to report bugs and issues, and be responsive to these reports.
10. When appropriate, publish source code of projects or components online.
11. When appropriate, share your development process and progress publicly.

### Key Questions
- How are you collecting user feedback for bugs and issues?
- If there is an API, what capabilities does it provide? Who uses it? How is it documented?
- If the codebase has not been released under an open source license, explain why.
- What components are made available to the public as open source?
- What datasets are made available to the public?

### Resources
The following resources can help you with this play:
- Check back soon for additional resources! 
Have ideas for resources for this play? Email us at info@standardscoordination.org. 

