---
id: 15
title: Make it scalable and sustainable
---
In an earlier play we discussed how challenging a task it can be to fund an Information Sharing and Safeguarding (IS&S) Environment. The goal for any project should be the long-term sustainability of the systems to meet the mission-critical needs of the agencies. To do this we can break the overall project into logical pieces or phases so that funding can be obtained across a longer period of time. Plans for IS&S Environment’s development and the technology stack must be scalable to meet any identified future phases. As the capabilities in the IS&S Environment are enabled, there will also be changes in user needs, corrective actions, and enhancements that will arise, and there should be a plan in place to not only sustain the project funding but also to keep the IS&S Environment meeting the needs of its end users.

### Checklist
1. Develop a long-term sustainability plan.
2. Create a maintenance and upgrade path responsive to user needs.
3. Seek placement of ongoing support in an established budget process with multi-year support defined.
4. Engage the community of interest in the product to ensure that a continual increase in usage is achieved to justify ongoing support.
5. Maintain an ongoing roadmap to add new capabilities and services based on user demands.

### Key Questions
- Where in the budget is ongoing maintenance and enhancement funded?
- What organization is responsible for the care and feeding of the IS&S Environment beyond initial implementation?
- What ongoing staff and contractor capacity is available to ensure responsiveness to user needs for bug fixes or enhancements?
- Do we have the requirements to ensure scalability?
- Have we addressed the scalability and new capabilities and services development in our contract with our solution providers?

### Resources
The following resources can help you with this play:
- Check back soon for additional resources! 
Have ideas for resources for this play? Email us at info@standardscoordination.org. 

